<h2>Essays, Moral, and Political, and Literary (1741, 1777)</h2>
<p><em>edited by Amyas Merivale</em></p>
<p>Disappointed with the poor reception of his <i>Treatise</i>, Hume turned to the essay style of writing, and published the first volume of his <i>Essays, Moral and Political</i> in 1741, with a second volume following in 1742. Following the success of this collection, Hume published three additional essays in 1748 (<i>Of National Characters</i>, <i>Of the Original Contract</i>, and <i>Of Passive Obedience</i>), and then a third edition of the set, also in 1748, that incorporated these three.</p>
<p>At the start of the 1750s, Hume’s reputation as an essay writer was well-established, and his new set of <i>Political Discourses</i>, published in 1752, was so successful that a second edition was brought out in the very same year. A third edition was printed in 1754.</p>
<p>In 1758, Hume collected all of his late works together in a collection of <i>Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects</i>, the first volume of which contained the <i>Essays, Moral and Political</i> followed by the <i>Political Discourses</i>. Now, however, the two sets were titled <i>Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary</i> parts 1 and 2.</p>
<p>The texts of all of the essays on this site are taken from the 1777 edition of the <i>Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects</i>, with the following exceptions: <i>Of Essay-Writing</i>, <i>Of Moral Prejudices</i>, and <i>Of the Middle Station of Life</i> only ever appeared in the 1742 edition of the <i>Essays, Moral and Political</i>, and the texts of these are therefore taken from that edition. <i>Of Impudence and Modesty</i>, <i>Of Love and Marriage</i>, and <i>Of the Study of History</i> last appeared in the 1760 edition of the <i>Essays and Treatises</i>, and the texts of these are therefore taken from that edition. <i>Of Avarice</i> and <i>A Character of Sir Robert Walpole</i> last appeared in the 1768 edition of the <i>Essays and Treatises</i>, and the texts of these are therefore taken from that edition. <i>A Character of Sir Robert Walpole</i> first appeared as an essay by itself, but in editions of Hume’s essays from 1748 to 1768, it appeared as a footnote at the end of the essay <i>That Politics may be Reduced to a Science</i>; from 1770 onwards this note was dropped. The text here is a reproduction of the footnote in the 1768 edition of <i>That Politics may be Reduced to a Science</i> (though the text of <em>that</em> essay, note, is taken from the 1777 edition, and therefore does not contain the footnote).</p>
