---
layout: notes
subsection: original
---
## Original Versions

By default, every text is displayed in its edited form. By deselecting “edited text” at the top of the page, however, you can switch to the original version. (This effects searches as well as the text displayed on the screen.) Original versions aim to be exact reproductions of the copytexts except for the following silent alterations.

<ol>
  <li>Rather than preserve the pagination of the copytexts, we have included page references to the most standard modern reference edition; Selby-Bigge and Nidditch for the <i>Treatise</i>, <i>Abstract</i>, and two <i>Enquiries</i>, Miller for the essays and <i>My Own Life</i>, Beauchamp for the <i>Natural History of Religion</i> and the <i>Dissertation on the Passions</i>, and Kemp Smith for the <i>Dialogues</i>. Hyphens preceeding page breaks have been removed.</li>
  <li>Footnote symbols are all converted to numbers, for ease of reference. Footnotes themselves are grouped together at the end of each section, after a horizontal line. Endnotes — in the case of texts from the <i>Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects</i> — are placed immediately following the footnote that refers to them (to save the reader from having to click or scroll needlessly). In the 1777 copytext, endnotes appeared at the very end of each volume, after a heading “NOTES TO THE FIRST VOLUME” or “NOTES TO THE SECOND VOLUME”.</li>
  <li>Footnote anchors and some other cross references appear in red (as opposed to the original black), indicating a link that can be clicked on to move you to the part of the text being referred to.</li>
  <li>Decorative first letters at the beginning of some of Hume’s texts have been changed to large dropped capitals. Dropped capitals at the start of subsequent sections are as in the copytexts.</li>
  <li>Quotation marks are used in the now-standard way, with one at the beginning and one at the end of each quotation. In some original texts, long quotations appear with a quotation mark at the beginning of every line.</li>
  <li>The eighteenth century long “s” (which looks rather like an “f”) has been everywhere replaced with an ordinary “s”. Ligatures (joining letter combinations such as “ct” and “fi”) have been removed. The combinations “æ” and “œ” have, however, been preserved.</li>
  <li>Commas and semicolons do not appear italicised in Hume’s texts, even in the context of a quotation or statement that is otherwise all in italics; we treat this as indicating that italicised commas and semicolons are indistinguishable from non-italicised commas and semicolons in the font used by Hume’s publishers. Since our own fonts are able to distinguish them, however, we have italicised these punctuation marks when they occur within a phrase that is otherwise all italicised. (Note, by contrast, that colons <em>are</em> sometimes italicised in Hume’s texts, typically when they follow an italicised word. The formatting of colons here follows the copytexts.)</li>
  <li>There are two additional features of the original versions that might be departures from the copytexts, though it is difficult to tell. The first arises because an ordinary lower case (short) “s” is indistinguishable, in the font used by Hume’s publishers, from an “s” in small capitals. This raises the question, when a name appears in small capitals, followed by an apostrophe and an “s”, whether the trailing “s” should be in small capitals or not. We have here taken the view that the capitalisation should apply only to the name itself, since this seems most logical and is also supported by Hume’s texts in the parallel case when names appear in italics, followed by an apostrophe and an “s”: in such cases, the “s” is not italicised (see, for example, footnotes 11 and 47 of the <i>Treatise</i>).</li>
  <li>The second additional feature concerns the placing of footnote anchors in the text. Sometimes these appear between two words, and at a roughly equal distance between the two. It is therefore unclear whether the anchor is meant to be placed at the end of the first word, the start of the second, or in the middle (with a space on either side). To avoid difficult decisions of this kind, and because the issue involves only a typographical convention with no significance for the understanding of the text, in every case we have simply placed the anchor at the end of the first word, in accordance with modern practice.</li>
</ol>
